The robots that we looked at so far move in
the 2D plane but most useful robots move in
three dimensions. What we want to do now is
to determine the pose of the end effector
of this robot which moves in three dimensional
space. The process we follow is very, very
similar to the process we did for the two
dimensional robots. First of all we introduced
a reference coordinate frame and then we indicate
the part of the robot the object whose pose
we’re interested in, that’s the end effector
of the robot indicated here by the symbol ksi E.
The first step then is a rotation of the coordinate
frame about the z axis by an amount Q1. Then
we translate that coordinate frame in the
x direction by an amount A1 the length of
the first link. Then we rotate the coordinate
frame about the z axis again by an amount Q2.
Next we translate in the X direction by an
amount A2 that’s the length of the second
link. Then we rotate around the Z axis again
by the angle Q3 and finally we translate in
the Z direction by the amount Q4.
We now have described the pose of the robot’s
end effector as a chain, a sequence of elementary
homogeneous transformation matrices. All of
the matrices belong to the set SE3 that’s
the set of all rotations and translations
in three dimensional space. We could expand
out each of these elementary matrices and
multiply them all together to come up with
a single homogeneous transformation metric
representation the pose the end effector of
this Scara robot. This small robot has gone
four degrees of freedom, four rotational joints.
So the first rotation is around an axis like
this. You see that the whole arm rotates around
the base. The second rotating joint has got
an axis like this and we can say that the
whole arm can rotate around this axis here.
The third joint is rotation around this axis,
you see that longer arm rotates around that
and the fourth joint is a rotation around
an axis here. You can see that the whole group
of mechanism rotates with respect to the lower arm.
Let’s finish off by looking at this four
joint educational robot. We've had quite a
bit of practice by now that we should be able
to write down the expression for the robot
end effector pose almost by inspection.
So this is the way I think about the problem.
I imagine that the robot is stretched down
vertically with its two fingers pointing to
the sky and then I just write down the sequence
of transformations. First of all the robots
rotates around the reference Z axis by the
amount Q1 and then we move up a little bit
which is in the Z direction and then we rotate
around the Y axis by the amount Q2.
Then we move up a little bit and encounter
the next joint, joint 3 we rotate around the
Y axis by the amount Q3 then we move up a
bit more in the Z direction encounter the
last joint, joint 4 we rotate around the Y
axis by the joint angle Q4. And then we move
up a bit more in the Z direction until we
reach the tip of the fingers.
So just by mentally walking through the robot
mechanism joint by joint, link by link we
can write down an expression for the pose
of the end effector. Then it’s a simple
a matter of expanding out the matrices and
then multiplying them all together. And we
can use a tool like MATLAB to make that very
easy for us.
Now we’re going to use MATLAB to determine
the pose of the end effector of this robot
which moves in three dimensions and we’re
going to do this symbolically but first of
all I’m going to define some symbolic variables
for the various link lengths A1, A2, A3, and
A4 and also for the four joint angles Q1,
Q2, Q3 and Q4. We’re going to use the trchain
function again. This time we’re going to
use the function called trchain which operates
in three dimensions rather than the function
trchain2 which operates in two dimensions
that we used in the previous examples.
And now I start to write this transform string
so we’re going to do a rotation around the
Z axis by Q1 and then we’re going to do
a translation in the Z direction by A1 then
we’re going to do a rotation around the
Y axis by Q2 and then we’re going to do
another translation in the Z direction by
A2 and then we’re going to do a rotation
around the Y axis by Q3 and then we’re going
to do another translation in the Z direction
by A3 and then we’re going to do a rotation
around the Y axis by Q4 and finally a translation
in the Z direction by A4.
I close that string and now I pass in the
joint angles Q1, Q2, Q3 and Q4 and here we
have the expression for the homogeneous transformation
which represents the pose of this robot which
moves in three dimensions. Because the robot’s
operating in three dimensions this homogeneous
transformation is a four-by-four matrix. And
we can see that it’s quite a large and complex
expression and I need to scroll sideways quite
a lot to get to end of it.
If I wanted to determine the X coordinate
of the end effector of this robot I would
do that by taking the element in the first
row and the forth column of this homogeneous
transformation matrix and that would be the
expression for the X coordinate of this robot
and again that itself is quite a complex expression.